---
date: 2024-06-30
title: "Two Go + PostgreSQL Timestamp Gotchas"
slug: "two-go-plus-postgresql-timestamp-gotchas"
tags: ["Databases", "Go"]
---

This week I added some additional tests to my [Bloggulus](https://github.com/theandrew168/bloggulus) project.
In the process of doing so, I discovered a couple places where timestamp values weren't matching what was expected.
For some background, I generate, process, and store all timestamps in the [UTC time standard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coordinated_Universal_Time).

The two gotchas were:

1. Unexpected conversion of UTC timestamps to local time
2. Mismatched precision between Go and PostgreSQL timestamps

# Unexpected Conversion

I store timestamps in the database using PostgreSQL's `timestamptz` [data type](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/datatype-datetime.html).
The problem I ran into was that even when I was inserting proper UTC timestamps (generated by Go's [time](https://pkg.go.dev/time) package), they were being returned from the database in my local time zone.
What's going on?
Why are these UTC timestamps being converted to Central Standard Time when selected from the database?

All of my Go projects use the amazing [pgx](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/jackc/pgx/v5) driver for communicating with PostgreSQL databases.
After quite a bit of researching, I realized that I was not alone in experiencing this inconsistency.
Someone else noticed and opened a [GitHub issue](https://github.com/jackc/pgx/issues/1195) for `pgx/v4` back in 2022.
The intially-proposed solutions were a bit fussy (in my opinion) and involved creating a custom codec type for the `timestamptz` type.

Thankfully, enough time has passed that the package's author was able to include a more [convenient fix](https://github.com/jackc/pgx/pull/1948) in `pgx/v5`!
A new `ScanLocation` field was added to the `TimestamptzCodec` type that enables customization of what time zone `timestamptz` values are read into.

In short, I just needed to override the type's codec:

```go
config, err := pgx.ParseConfig(uri)
if err != nil {
    return nil, err
}

conn, err := pgx.ConnectConfig(ctx, config)
if err != nil {
    return nil, err
}

// Ensure timestamps read from a timestamptz column retain their UTC location.
conn.TypeMap().RegisterType(&pgtype.Type{
    Name:  "timestamptz",
    OID:   pgtype.TimestamptzOID,
    Codec: &pgtype.TimestamptzCodec{ScanLocation: time.UTC},
})
```

The code is similar if using [pgxpool](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/jackc/pgx/v5/pgxpool) but we need to setup the override inside of the pool's `AfterConnect` hook:

```go
config, err := pgxpool.ParseConfig(uri)
if err != nil {
    return nil, err
}

// Ensure timestamps read from a timestamptz column retain their UTC location.
config.AfterConnect = func(ctx context.Context, conn *pgx.Conn) error {
    conn.TypeMap().RegisterType(&pgtype.Type{
        Name:  "timestamptz",
        OID:   pgtype.TimestamptzOID,
        Codec: &pgtype.TimestamptzCodec{ScanLocation: time.UTC},
    })

    return nil
}

pool, err := pgxpool.NewWithConfig(ctx, config)
if err != nil {
    return nil, err
}
```

## Digging Deeper

Why did this happen in the first place?
Why is there even any ambiguity with respect to what time zone should be used when reading the timestamp from the database?
Isn't the time zone included with the timestamp since I'm using `timestamptz`?

PostgreSQL offers two [timestamp types](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/datatype-datetime.html):

1. `timestamp without time zone` (aka `timestamp`)
2. `timestamp with time zone` (aka `timestamptz`)

When I starting building the app, I figured that `timestamptz` was what I wanted since my timestamps include a specific time zone: UTC (I've since learned that UTC isn't really a time zone: it is a time standard).
I thought that the main difference between `timestamp` and `timestamptz` was that `timestamptz` stored a few extra bits of data to represent the timestamp's time zone.
However, that is _not_ the case.

I dug deeper into the [documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/datatype-datetime.html#DATATYPE-DATETIME-INPUT-TIME-STAMPS) and found some important notes:

> For `timestamp with time zone`, the internally stored value is always in UTC (Universal Coordinated Time, traditionally known as Greenwich Mean Time, GMT).  
> ...  
> When a timestamp with time zone value is output, it is always converted from UTC to the current timezone zone, and displayed as local time in that zone.

It turns out that the `timestamptz` type does not work how I'd originally assumed.
Instead, timestamps are checked for a time zone upon insertion but then converted to and stored as UTC.
The original time zone of the timestamp is lost after being normalized and inserted.
When selected, PostgreSQL converts `timestamptz` values to the database's configured timezone (which is correctly set to UTC in my case).

When pgx reads a `timestamptz` value from the database and converts it into Go's `time.Time` type, it has to make a decision about what to do with the stamp's time zone.
Should it be left as UTC or converted to the program's local time zone?
Historically, pgx unconditionally chose the latter.
But as of `v5`, the package now allows us to influence the decision.
Neat!

# Mismatched Precision

This one is quite a bit simpler!
In short, Go’s timestamps are represented with nanosecond precision but PostgreSQL's only handle microseconds.
Therefore, you lose precision upon insertion and any logic that "round-trips" a Go timestamp to and from the database yields a different, less precise value at the end.
This hiccup has been [discovered and discussed](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/60433870/saving-time-time-in-golang-to-postgres-timestamp-with-time-zone-field) before, too.
The suggestion from that question that made the most sense to me was to immediately round any timestamps generated by Go down to microsecond precision.

This, combined with defaulting all newly-created timestamps to UTC, led me to write a simple `timeutil` package to encapsulate the growing "incantation" required to generate a valid timestamp:

```go
package timeutil

import "time"

// Return the current UTC time rounded to microseconds (to match PostgreSQL).
func Now() time.Time {
    return time.Now().UTC().Round(time.Microsecond)
}
```

# Conclusion

That's all for today.
I figure that these "gotchas" could easily happen to someone else and were worth sharing.
At the end of the day, I learned something new and documenting the journey will help _me_ remember the details someday.

Thanks for reading!
